- What is the probability of having a boy and a girl when having two children? The answer via enumeration is 1/2: B+B, B+G, G+B, G+G, because there are two cases out of four when the children comprise a set of {B, G}. However, the usual explanation given is that either the boy can be first and the girl second or the other way around. This explanation doesn't quite appeal to me, I think particularly due to the choice of words "first" and "second" which suggest some sort of ordering. People might fixate on this and raise objections that the children might be twins and why does it even matter in which order they get out of the womb anyway. How about phrasing it in the following way: for each child there is a separate and distinguishable zygote (I think that's what you call an inseminated egg?), they can even exist simultaneously, in case of twins. Since they are distinguishable, we can label them 1 and 2. Now we can place "boy" and "girl" labels on them and this can be done in the four ways listed earlier: 1B+2B, 1B+2G, 1G+2B, 1G+2G.

- It's easy to enumerate natural numbers: 1, 2, 3, ..., ad infinitum. But how do we enumerate integers (negative and non-negative numbers), that extend from negative infinity to positive infinity: ..., -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, ...? Where do we start? We clearly cannot start at the smallest number as it is at negative infinity. To beat this conundrum, mathematicians re-order the integers, e.g. in this way: 0, -1, 1, -2, 2, -3, 3, ... or in this way: 0, 1, -1, 2, -2, 3, -3. We have overcome this impasse.

