---
title: "Learning"
author: "rahdeck"
draft: true
---
My experiences at learning.  
  
Examples of mastery learning - very deep subject, multi-faceted.
Requires at least a few years of experience to be any good at and get a
job. Playing instrument is a skill like that, programming is another
one.  
  
Good news: you do not always need to be a master. Quite often you just
need a basic understanding, hard to believe how many people don't bother
to learn even that. There are many skills you can hugely benefit from
with even a basic level of command.  
  
Examples of short, targeted learning tasks I did: finances, game of
bridge. Both possible to reach a decent level of understanding in a few
weeks. In finance the biggest thing was learning the jargon,
understanding time-value of money, compound interest and differences
between various financial instruments (stocks, ETFs, mutual funds, etc).
That's good enough to start and manage your finances and even
investments. You don't need to be a professional to invest in index
funds or similar financial instruments.  
  
Bridge: learning basic bidding and play is at most a few days of
learning. Then you can start enjoying playing with others and start to
develop the skill further.  
  
Many people give up too early to get the basics. The initial investment
of time and focus is not that huge and pays off handsomely. If you sit
on your ass and watch TV or surf Facebook you're going to lose that time
anyway and will have nothing to show for it! It's like buying a car on
low-interest credit (with an excuse of opportunity cost) and then not
investing the remaining cash anyway (evidently losing any opportunity).
You pay interest and spend the cash, instead of investing it into
higher-interest financial instruments (stocks, etc). Think of every bit
of time you have as something that is going to pass and be irretrievably
gone anyway, might as well use it well and to your advantage instead of
idling it away.  
  
Using the rule of 72 I picked up studying finance I can tell you (if we
assume knowledge breeds knowledge) that if your friend and you study for
1 hour and 1 hour 6 mins respectively a day for 7 years, you will have
twice the knowledge of your friend at the end! That's the power of
compound interest. If money is a more interesting investment (pun
intended) to you, then the same principle applies. If your friend
invests 1$ day and you invest 1.1$ a day, at the end of 7 years
(assuming daily compounding) he ends up with XXX $ while you have XXX
$!  
  
Resources are plentiful on the web. You can re-use knowledge you already
have to apply to a new subject (math to finances for example,
combinatorics to bridge) and learn it faster. There is such thing as
fundamental knowledge that should be acquired to speed up and facilitate
learning other areas of knowledge which derive or draw from it. This
often includes subjects taught at school such as mathematics, writing
and composition, reading skills. All those I consider to be fundamental
and worth becoming fluent in.  
  
Learning motor skills is different - takes mostly practice and there are
usually no shortcuts. Snowboarding, skiing, surfing, swimming are all
examples that require very fine and precise motor control to achieve
results. It doesn't come in a few da
